## Table of Contents
1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [Getting Started - Linux](#getting-started)
   - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
   - [Setup](#setup)
3. [Usage Examples](#usage-examples)
4. [Reasoning](#reasoning)
5. [Further improvements](#further-improvements)


# Introduction
Welcome to the README.md file for the project. This is a simple Flask application that exposes a REST API
endpoint for querying dummy customer orders in a sqlite3 database. 

Additionally, the user of this project can use a CLI command to run a simple ETL script which will total the value for
all orders placed by active customers.

# Getting Started
## Prerequisites
- make
- curl

## Setup
1. Clone the repository
2. Run `make setup` to install dependencies
   - Note: you might need to restart your terminal after this step - UV might not be on PATH. For further details, refer
   to the [UV documentation](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/).
3. Run `make run` to start the application

Note: The application will be running on port 5000 by default.

##  Getting Started - Windows
Windows users: WSL is recommended

# Usage Examples

You should already have the data loaded if you completed the getting started steps.
However, if anything went wrong, please run make run again - this should reset the database.

## API
The API only exposes one endpoint:

Host: localhost:5000

Endpoint: `customers/<int:customer_id>`

### Browser
Navigate to your favourite browser and enter the following URL:
`http://localhost:5000/customers/1`
This will return a JSON response with the details of the customer with ID 1.
In the very (not) real customer data you should see John Doe who loves sausage rolls and yorkshire puddins.

### Curl
Or if you do not have a favourite browser you can use curl:
`curl http://localhost:5000/customers/1`
And you should get the same response.

## Script
The script **customer_total_orders_value(...)** is located in the order_totals module.
To see it in action, run the following command:
`flask --app mini_etl demo-script-run`
This will generate a CSV file with the total value of all orders placed by active customers.

Our business is small, so we only have two active (but very loyal) customers - Jane and John Doe.
There are two other customers in the database, but Bob Smith has been suspended for ordering 500 cans of beans and will
therefore not appear in the CSV file, as we will not be fulfilling his order. 
Sarah Jane has been logically deleted (marked as inactive) and therefore will also not appear in the file.

# Reasoning

## Tools
Upon skimming the project specification, my mind started chanting "DJANGO, DJANGO, DJANGO!" This is purely because
I have been using Django for a while now exactly for ETL. However, once I digested what I was reading, I
realised that this would be like bringing a wrecking ball to destroy a dry wall (probably worse even).

Reasons for instant Django omission: 
- no auth required
- no ORM required - we are creating 2 tables and making 2 simple queries
- no admin interface required
- no UI required
  (etc... Django is simply overkill for this simple project)

Then, I started thinking about what other things I used for APIs in the past.
FastAPI seemed like a good fit, but, upon reading about it, I decided that again, it would be too much for this
project as it is designed for production-level high-throughput use cases. 

While I was reading about FastAPI, I came across Flask. ["Flask is a lightweight WSGI web application framework.
It is designed to make getting started quick and easy"](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/stable/)
(from the Flask docs). I never used it before, but it is well-documented. I decided to use it for this project because
it is lightweight and because the tutorial is straightforward to follow. 

Other considerations that did not make the cut:
- SQL Alchemy as an ORM. Out of scope based on the project specification.
- Alembic for database migrations. Out of scope - this will not be a production project and would take time to set up.
- PostgreSQL as a database. Same as above.

Python version choice: https://devguide.python.org/versions/ 3.14 is the latest version of Python.

Dependency manager: UV
For over a year, I've used it in production projects, finding it to be swift,
uncomplicated, and significantly more intuitive than poetry.

DB choice: sqlite3 - It is lightweight, well-known, and I have used it before.

Only other installed package:
- pandas - well established and documented library, golden standard for data processing in Python.
  I knew it had the .to_csv() method. 
- pytest - standard testing library for Python, used for unit testing. It is something I am already familiar with.

## Structure
- in root we have non-source code files:
  - .gitignore - to ignore files that should not be committed to git. This was auto-generated by GitHub.
    I added the following files: .idea (pycharm junk) and .customer_total_orders_value*
    (ETL output, so no one accidentally commits it - this could potentially be a security issue)
  - Makefile - to make running the project easier
  - README.md - this file
  - .python-version - to specify the python version to use
  - pyproject.toml - to specify the dependencies to install

- mini_etl - where our application code lives
  - __init__.py - to make the mini_etl directory a python module. This is also where the Flask definition lives.
  - db.py - to define the database connection
  - cli.py - CLI commands deserve their own module. 
  - order_totals.py - the ETL script itself.
  - api package - for the sake of extensibility and ease of reading the folder structure, I made it a package. This way
    in the future, if more API endpoints are added, they can be added in the same folder structure.
    - customers.py - customers API
  - demo_data folder - to store the demo data used in the project - I wanted to separate it from the actual code.
  - schema.sql - to define the database schema.
- tests - where our tests are located.

## Data flow
- API path: SQLite -> Flask -> JSON response
- ETL path: SQLite -> script -> CSV

## Some interesting design decisions
- The etl script accepts conn as a parameter as the project spec mentions it might be ran periodically or in batches. 
- The email field in the customers table is unique, but it is not a foreign key. This is because having duplicate emails
  for customers could potentially lead to duplicate email notifications being sent (this is not a mentioned feature,
  but a realistic extension point for the project)
- I was very tempted to make another table "products" and have a foreign key relationship between orders and products.
  This is because it's a very obvious entity and would allow for one order to have multiple products - a very realistic
  real world scenario. However, this would make the schema more complex and I would be making an assumption about the 
  business logic. Maybe the client wants the data to be stored in this way for reporting purposes. In a real-world scenario,
  I would clarify this point with the client.
- conn.execute('SELECT * FROM customers WHERE id = ?', (customer_id,)).fetchone() the query is formatted like this to
  protect us from SQL injection attacks.
- I added a timestamp to the generated CSV file, so that the user can easily identify which file is the latest. 
  Additionally, the same file won't be overwritten if the script is run again.
- I used the "with" statement to create a context manager for the database connection - this is because I wanted to make
  sure that the connection is closed after the script has finished running.
- The example users in the demo data are just covering the bases - one active with multiple orders, one active with one order,
  one inactive and one suspended with an order. 
- Tests and src are 2 separate folders. This is because test code must be kept separate from the source code.
- The test setup uses the schema.sql and data.sql to ensure that we are getting the same environment. Plus we are
  keeping it DRY. 

# Further improvements
- add better error handling - I went for broad Except clauses which are generally considered bad practice.
- tighten type hints - some funcs are missing them.
- add pre-commit hooks - use pre-commit to run linting and formatting on every commit. Maybe ruff. 
- complete tests for the ETL script.
- follow conventional commits (more strictly). 
- add a solid support for Windows users. A simple docker container should be enough.
- follow TDD development.
- expand the dummy data to include more scenarios.